<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The subject of the following book is planting: in handling of which argument, the poet shows all the different methods of raising trees, describes their variety, and gives rules for the management of each in particular. He then points out the soils in which the several plants thrive best, and thence takes occasion to run out into the praises of Italy; after which, he gives some directions for discovering the nature of every soil, prescribes rules for the dressing of vines, olives, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and concludes the Georgic with a panegyric on a country life.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Thus far of tillage, and of heavenly signs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now sing, my muse, the growth of generous vines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shady groves, the woodland progeny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the slow product of Minerva’s tree.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Great father Bacchus! to my song repair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For clustering grapes are thy peculiar care:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, large bunches load the bending vine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the last blessings of the year are thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee his joys the jolly Autumn owes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fermenting juice the vat o’erflows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, strip with me, my god! come drench all o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy limbs in must of wine, and drink at every pore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some trees their birth to bounteous Nature owe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some, without the pains of planting, grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With osiers thus the banks of brooks abound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprung from the watery genius of the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same principles gray willows come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herculean poplar, and the tender broom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But some, from seeds enclosed in earth, arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thus the mastful chestnut mates the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence rise the branching beech and vocal oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Jove of old oraculously spoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some from the root a rising wood disclose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus elms, and thus the salvage cherry grows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the green bays, that binds the poet’s brows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoots, and is sheltered by the mother’s boughs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These ways of planting, Nature did ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For trees and shrubs, and all the sylvan reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others there are, by late experience found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some cut the shoots, and plant in furrowed ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some cover rooted stalks in deeper mould;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some, cloven stakes; and (wondrous to behold!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sharpened ends in earth their footing place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dry poles produce a living race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some bow their vines, which buried in the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tops in distant arches rise again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others no root require; the labourer cuts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young slips, and in the soil securely puts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en stumps of olives, bared of leaves, and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revive, and oft redeem their withered head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis usual now an inmate graff to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With insolence invade a foreign tree:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus pears and quinces from the crab-tree come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the ruddy cornel bears the plum.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then let the learnèd gardener mark with care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kinds of stocks, and what those kinds will bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Explore the nature of each several tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, known, improve with artful industry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let no spot of idle earth be found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cultivate the genius of the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For open Ismarus will Bacchus please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taburnus loves the shade of olive-trees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The virtues of the several soils I sing.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maecenas, now thy needful succour bring!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou! the better part of my renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspire thy poet, and thy poem crown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embark with me, while I new tracts explore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flying sails and breezes from the shore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that my song, in such a scanty space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large a subject fully can embrace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though I were supplied with iron lungs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred mouths, filled with as many tongues:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But steer my vessel with a steady hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And coast along the shore in sight of land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will I tire thy patience with a train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of preface, or what ancient poets feign.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The trees, which of themselves advance in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are barren kinds, but strongly built and fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the vigour of the native earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maintains the plant, and makes a manly birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet these, receiving graffs of other kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thence transplanted, change their salvage mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wildness lose, and, quitting nature’s part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obey the rules and discipline of art.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same do trees, that, sprung from barren roots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In open fields transplanted bear their fruits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, where they grow, the native energy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns all into the substance of the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starves and destroys the fruit, is only made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For brawny bulk, and for a barren shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plant that shoots from seed, a sullen tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At leisure grows, for late posterity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The generous flavour lost, the fruits decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And savage grapes are made the birds’ ignoble prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Much labour is required in trees, to tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wild disorder, and in ranks reclaim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well must the ground be digged, and better dressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New soil to make, and meliorate the rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old stakes of olive trees in plants revive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the same method Paphian myrtles live;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But nobler vines by propagation thrive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From roots hard hazels, and, from scions, rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall ash, and taller oak that mates the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Palm, poplar, fir, descending from the steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hills, to try the dangers of the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thin-leaved arbute, hazle-graffs receives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And planes huge apples bear, that bore but leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus mastful beech the bristly chestnut bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wild ash is white with blooming pears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greedy swine, from grafted elms are fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With falling acorns, that on oaks are bred.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But various are the ways to change the state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of plants, to bud, to graff, to inoculate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, where the tender rinds of trees disclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their shooting gems, a swelling knot there grows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just in that space a narrow slit we make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then other buds from bearing trees we take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inserted thus, the wounded rind we close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whose moist womb the admitted infant grows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the smoother bole from knots is free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We make a deep incision in the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the solid wood the slip enclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battening bastard shoots again and grows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in short space the laden boughs arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With happy fruit advancing to the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mother plant admires the leaves unknown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of alien trees, and apples not her own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of vegetable woods are various kinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the same species are of several minds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lotes, willows, elms, have different forms allowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So funeral cypress, rising like a shroud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat olive-trees of sundry sorts appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sundry shapes their unctuous berries bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Radii long olives, Orchites round produce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bitter Pausia, pounded for the juice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcinous’ orchard various apples bears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike are bergamots and pounder pears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor our Italian vines produce the shape,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or taste, or flavour, of the Lesbian grape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thasian vines in richer soils abound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mareotic grow in barren ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Psythian grape we dry: Lagean juice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will stammering tongues and staggering feet produce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rath ripe are some, and some of later kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of golden some, and some of purple rind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall I praise the Rhaetian grape divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which yet contends not with Falernian wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Aminean many a consulship survives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And longer than the Lydian vintage lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or high Phanaeus, king of Chian growth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, for large quantities and lasting, both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The less Argitis bears the prize away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Rhodian, sacred to the solemn day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In second services is poured to Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And best accepted by the gods above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor must Bumastus his old honours lose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In length and largeness like the dugs of cows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pass the rest, whose every race, and name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kinds, are less material to my theme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which who would learn, as soon may tell the sands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven by the western wind on Libyan lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or number, when the blustering Eurus roars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The billows beating on Ionian shores.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor every plant on every soil will grow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sallow loves the watery ground, and low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marshes, alders: Nature seems to ordain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocky cliff for the wild ash’s reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The baleful yew to northern blasts assigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shores the myrtles, and to mounts the vines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Regard the extremest cultivated coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hot Arabia to the Scythian frost:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sort of trees their several countries know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black ebon only will in India grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And odorous frankincense on the Sabaean bough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balm slowly trickles through the bleeding veins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of happy shrubs in Idumaean plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green Egyptian thorn, for med’cine good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Aethiops’ hoary trees and woolly wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let others tell; and how the Seres spin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their fleecy forests in a slender twine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mighty trunks of trees on Indian shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose height above the feathered arrow soars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot from the toughest bow, and by the brawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of expert archers, with vast vigour drawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharp-tasted citrons, Median climes produce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Bitter the rind, but generous is the juice),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cordial fruit, a present antidote</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the direful stepdame’s deadly draught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, mixing wicked weeds with words impure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fate of envied orphans would procure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large is the plant, and like a laurel grows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, did it not a different scent disclose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laurel were: the fragrant flowers contemn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stormy winds, tenacious of their stem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this, the Medes to labouring age bequeath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New lungs, and cure the sourness of the breath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But neither Median woods, (a plenteous land),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Ganges, Hermus rolling golden sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Bactria, nor the richer Indian fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all the gummy stores Arabia yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor any foreign earth of greater name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can with sweet Italy contend in fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bulls, whose nostrils breathe a living flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have turned our turf; no teeth of serpents here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were sown, an armèd host and iron crop to bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fruitful vines, and the fat olive’s freight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harvests heavy with their fruitful weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorn our fields; and on the cheerful green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grazing flocks and lowing herds are seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior horse, here bred, is taught to train:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There flows Clitumnus through the flowery plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose waves, for triumphs after prosperous war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The victim ox and snowy sheep prepare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetual spring our happy climate sees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice breed the cattle, and twice bear the trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summer suns recede by slow degrees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our land is from the rage of tigers freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor nourishes the lion’s angry seed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor poisonous aconite is here produced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grows unknown, or is, when known, refused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in so vast a length our serpents glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or raiswd on such a spiry volume ride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next add our cities of illustrious name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their costly labour, and stupendous frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our forts on steepy hills, that far below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See wanton streams in winding valleys flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our twofold seas, that washing either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rich recruit of foreign stores provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our spacious lakes; thee, Larius, first; and next</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benacus, with tempestuous billows vexed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or shall I praise thy ports, or mention make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the vast mound that binds the Lucrine lake?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the disdainful sea, that, shut from thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roars round the structure, and invades the fence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, where secure the Julian waters glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or where Avernus’ jaws admit the Tyrrhene tide?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our quarries, deep in earth, were famed of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For veins of silver, and for ore of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The inhabitants themselves their country grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence rose the Marsian and Sabellian race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong-limbed and stout, and to the wars inclined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard Ligurians a laborious kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Volscians armed with iron-headed darts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides⁠—an offspring of undaunted hearts⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Decii, Marii, great Camillus, came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence, and greater Scipio’s double name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty Caesar, whose victorious arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To farthest Asia carry fierce alarms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avert unwarlike Indians from his Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Triumph abroad, secure our peace at home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hail, sweet Saturnian soil! of fruitful grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great parent, greater of illustrious men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee my tuneful accents will I raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And treat of arts disclosed in ancient days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more unlocked for thee the sacred spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old Ascraean verse in Roman cities sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The nature of their several soils now see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their strength, their colour, their fertility:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first for heath, and barren hilly ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where meagre clay and flinty stones abound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the poor soil all succour seems to want⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this suffices the Palladian plant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undoubted signs of such a soil are found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For here wild olive-shoots o’erspread the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaps of berries strew the fields around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, where the soil, with fattening moisture filled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is clothed with grass, and fruitful to be tilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as in cheerful vales we view from high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which dripping rocks with rolling streams supply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And feed with ooze; where rising hillocks run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In length, and open to the southern sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fern succeeds, ungrateful to the plough⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gentle ground to generous grapes allow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong stocks of vines it will in time produce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overflow the vats with friendly juice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as our priests in golden goblets pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gods, the givers of the cheerful hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then when the bloated Tuscan blows his horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reeking entrails are in chargers borne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If herds or fleecy flocks be more thy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or goats that graze the field, and burn it bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then seek Tarentum’s lawns, and farthest coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or such a field as hapless Mantua lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where silver swans sail down the watery road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graze the floating herbage of the flood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There crystal streams perpetual tenor keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor food nor springs are wanting to thy sheep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what the day devours, the nightly dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall to the morn in pearly drops renew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat crumbling earth is fitter for the plough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putrid and loose above, and black below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ploughing is an imitative toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resembling nature in an easy soil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No land for seed like this; no fields afford</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large an income to the village lord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No toiling teams from harvest-labour come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So late at night, so heavy-laden home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The like of forest land is understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence the surly ploughman grubs the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had for length of ages idle stood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then birds forsake the ruins of their seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, flying from their nests, their callow young forget.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The course lean gravel, on the mountain-sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce dewy beverage for the bees provides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor chalk, nor crumbling stones, the food of snakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That work in hollow earth their winding tracks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soil exhaling clouds of subtle dews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imbibing moisture which with ease she spews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which rusts not iron, and whose mould is clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well clothed with cheerful grass, and ever green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is good for olives, and aspiring vines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embracing husband elms in amorous twines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is fit for feeding cattle, fit to sow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And equal to the pasture and the plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is the soil of fat Campanian fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such large increase the land that joins Vesuvius yields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a country could Acerrae boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Clanius overflowed the unhappy coast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I teach thee next the differing soils to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light for vines, the heavier for the plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose first a place for such a purpose fit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There dig the solid earth, and sink a pit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next fill the hole with its own earth again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trample with thy feet, and tread it in:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, if it rise not to the former height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of superfice, conclude that soil is light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A proper ground for pasturage and vines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if the sullen earth, so pressed, repines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within its native mansion to retire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stays without, a heap of heavy mire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis good for arable, a glebe that asks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tough teams of oxen, and laborious tasks.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Salt earth and bitter are not fit to sow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will be tamed or mended with the plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet grapes degenerate there; and fruits declined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their first flavorous taste, renounce their kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This truth by sure experiment is tried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For first an osier colander provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of twigs thick wrought (such, toiling peasants twine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When through strait passages they strain their wine:)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this close vessel place that earth accursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But filled brimful with wholesome water first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then run it through; the drops will rope around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by the bitter taste, disclose the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fatter earth by handling we may find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ease distinguished from the meagre kind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor soil will crumble into dust; the rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will to the fingers cleave like clammy pitch:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moist earth produces corn and grass, but both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too rank and too luxuriant in their growth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not my land so large a promise boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the lank ears in length of stem be lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavier earth is by her weight betray’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lighter in the poising hand is weigh’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis easy to distinguish by the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The colour of the soil, and black from white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the cold ground is difficult to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this the plants that prosper there, will show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black ivy, pitch trees, and the baleful yeugh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These rules considered well, with early care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vineyard destined for thy vines prepare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But long before the planting, dig the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With furrows deep that cast a rising mound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clods, exposed to winter winds, will bake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For putrid earth will best in vineyards take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hoary frosts, after the painful toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of delving hinds, will rot the mellow soil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Some peasants, not to omit the nicest care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the same soil their nursery prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that of their plantation; lest the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Translated, should not with the soil agree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside, to plant it as it was, they mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven’s four quarters on the tender bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the north or south, restore the side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at their birth did heat or cold abide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strong is custom; such effects can use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tender souls of pliant plants produce.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Choose next a province for thy vineyard’s reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hills above, or in the lowly plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If fertile fields or valleys be thy choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plant thick; for bounteous Bacchus will rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In close plantations there; but, if the vine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rising ground be placed, or hills supine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extend thy loose battalions largely wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening thy ranks and files on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But marshalled all in order as they stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let no soldier straggle from his band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As legions in the field their front display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try the fortune of some doubtful day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And move to meet their foes with sober pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strict to their figure, though in wider space.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the battle joins, while from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field yet glitters with the pomp of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And equal Mars, like an impartial lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves all to fortune, and the dint of sword:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let thy vines in intervals be set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not their rural discipline forget;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indulge their width, and add a roomy space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That their extremest lines may scarce embrace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor this alone to indulge a vain delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make a pleasing prospect for the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for the ground itself; this only way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can equal vigour to the plants convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, crowded, want the room, their branches to display.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How deep they must be planted, wouldst thou know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shallow furrows vines securely grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so the rest of plants; for Jove’s own tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That holds the woods in awful sovereignty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Requires a depth of lodging in the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, next the lower skies, a bed profound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High as his topmost boughs to heaven ascend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So low his roots to hell’s dominion tend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, nor winds, nor winter’s rage o’erthrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bulky body, but unmoved he grows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For length of ages lasts his happy reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lives of mortal man contend in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in the midst of his own strength he stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretching his brawny arms, and leafy hands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shade protects the plains, his head the hills commands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The hurtful hazel in thy vineyard shun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor plant it to receive the setting sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor break the topmost branches from the tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor prune, with blunted knife, the progeny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Root up wild olives from thy labour’d lands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sparkling fire, from hinds’ unwary hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is often scattered o’er their unctuous rinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after spread abroad by raging winds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For first the smouldering flame the trunk receives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascending thence, it crackles in the leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length victorious to the top aspires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Involving all the wood with smoky fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most, when driven by winds, the flaming storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the long files destroys the beauteous form.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ashes then the unhappy vineyard lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will the blasted plants from ruin rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will the withered stock be green again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the wild olive shoots, and shades the ungrateful plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be not seduced with wisdom’s empty shows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stir the peaceful ground when Boreas blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When winter frosts constrain the field with cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fainty root can take no steady hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when the golden spring reveals the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the white bird returns, whom serpents fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That season deem the best to plant thy vines:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next that, is when autumnal warmth declines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere heat is quite decayed, or cold begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Capricorn admits the winter sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The spring adorns the woods, renews the leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The womb of earth the genial seed receives:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then almighty Jove descends, and pours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into his buxom bride his fruitful showers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, mixing his large limbs with hers, he feeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her births with kindly juice, and fosters teeming seeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then joyous birds frequent the lonely grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beasts, by nature stung, renew their love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fields the blades of buried corn disclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while the balmy western spirit blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth to the breath her bosom dares expose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kindly moisture then the plants abound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass securely springs above the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender twig shoots upward to the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the faith of the new sun relies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swerving vines on the tall elms prevail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhurt by southern showers, or northern hail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They spread their gems, the genial warmth to share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boldly trust their buds in open air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this soft season (let me dare to sing),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world was hatched by heaven’s imperial king⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In prime of all the year, and holidays of spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the new creation first appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No other was the tenor of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When laughing heaven did the great birth attend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eastern winds their wintry breath suspend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sheep first saw the sun in open fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And savage beasts were sent to stock the wilds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And golden stars flew up to light the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man’s relentless race from stony quarries rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could the tender new creation bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The excessive heats or coldness of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, chilled by winter, or by summer fired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The middle temper of the spring required,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When warmth and moisture did at once abound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaven’s indulgence brooded on the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For what remains, in depth of earth secure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy covered plants, and dung with hot manure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shells and gravel in the ground enclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For through their hollow chinks the water flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, thus imbibed, returns in misty dews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, steaming up, the rising plant renews.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some husbandmen, of late, have found the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hilly heap of stones above to lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And press the plants with shards of potters’ clay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fence against immoderate rain they found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the dog-star cleaves the thirsty ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be mindful, when thou hast entombed the shoot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With store of earth around to feed the root;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With iron teeth of rakes and prongs, to move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crusted earth, and loosen it above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then exercise thy sturdy steers to plough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt thy vines, and teach thy feeble row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mount on reeds, and wands, and, upward led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ashen poles to raise their forky head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On these new crutches let them learn to walk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, swerving upwards with a stronger stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They brave the winds, and, clinging to their guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On tops of elms at length triumphant ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, in their tender nonage, while they spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their springing leafs, and lift their infant head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And upward while they shoot in open air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indulge their childhood, and the nurseling spare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor exercise thy rage on new-born life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let thy hand supply the pruning-knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crop luxuriant stragglers, nor be loth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strip the branches of their leafy growth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when the rooted vines, with steady hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can clasp their elms, then husbandman, be bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lop the disobedient boughs, that strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond their ranks; let crooked steel invade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawless troops, which discipline disclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their superfluous growth with rigour tame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next, fenced with hedges and deep ditches round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exclude the encroaching cattle from thy ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the tender gems but just appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unable to sustain the uncertain year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose leaves are not alone foul winter’s prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oft by summer suns are scorched away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, worse than both, become the unworthy browse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of buffaloes, salt goats, and hungry cows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not December’s frost, that burns the boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor dog-days’ parching heat, that splits the rocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are half so harmful as the greedy flocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their venomed bite, and scars indented on the stocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, the malefactor goat was laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Bacchus’ altar, and his forfeit paid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At Athens thus old comedy began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When round the streets the reeling actors ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In country villages, and crossing ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contending for the prizes of their plays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, glad with Bacchus, on the grassy soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped o’er the skins of goats besmeared with oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Roman youth, derived from ruined Troy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rude Saturnian rhymes express their joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With taunts, and laughter loud, their audience please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deformed with vizards, cut from barks of trees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In jolly hymns they praise the god of wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose earthen images adorn the pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there are hung on high, in honour of the vine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A madness so devout the vineyards fills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hollow valleys and on rising hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On whate’er side he turns his honest face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dances in the wind, those fields are in his grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Bacchus therefore let us tune our lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in our mother-tongue resound his praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thin cakes in chargers, and a guilty goat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged by the horns, be to his altars brought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose offered entrails shall his crime reproach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drip their fatness from the hazel broach.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To dress thy vines, new labour is required;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor must the painful husbandman be tired:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thrice, at least, in compass of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy vineyard must employ the sturdy steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the glebe; besides thy daily pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break the clods, and make the surface plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To unload the branches, or the leaves to thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That suck the vital moisture of the vine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus in a circle runs the peasant’s pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the year rolls within itself again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en in the lowest months, when storms have shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From vines the hairy honours of their head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not then the drudging hind his labour ends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the coming year his care extends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en then the naked vine he persecutes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pruning-knife at once reforms and cuts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be first to dig the ground; be first to burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The branches lopt; and first the props return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into thy house, that bore the burdened vines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But last to reap the vintage of thy wines.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Twice in the year luxuriant leaves o’ershade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The encumbered vine; rough brambles twice invade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard labour both! Commend the large excess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of spacious vineyards; cultivate the less.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides, in woods the shrubs of prickly thorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sallows and reeds, on banks of rivers born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remain to cut; for vineyards, useful found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stay thy vines, and fence thy fruitful ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor when thy tender trees at length are bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When peaceful vines from pruning-hooks are free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When husbands have surveyed the last degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And utmost files of plants, and ordered every tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en when they sing at ease in full content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insulting o’er the toils they underwent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet still they find a future task remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the soil, and break the clods again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after all, their joys are insincere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While falling rains on ripening grapes they fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite opposite to these are olives found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No dressing they require, and dread no wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor rakes nor harrows need; but, fixed below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoice in open air, and unconcern’dly grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soil itself due nourishment supplies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plough but the furrows, and the fruits arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Content with small endeavours, till they spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft peace they figure, and sweet plenty bring:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then olives plant, and hymns to Pallas sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus apple-trees, whose trunks are strong to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their spreading boughs, exert themselves in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Want no supply, but stand secure alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not trusting foreign forces, but their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till with the ruddy freight the bending branches groan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus trees of nature, and each common bush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncultivated thrive, and with red berries blush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vile shrubs are shorn for browse; the towering height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of unctuous trees are torches for the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall we doubt (indulging easy sloth),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sow, to set, and to reform their growth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave the lofty plants⁠—the lowly kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are for the shepherd or the sheep designed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en humble broom and osiers have their use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shade for sleep, and food for flocks, produce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hedges for corn, and honey for the bees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides the pleasing prospect of the trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How goodly looks Cytorus, ever green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With boxen groves! with what delight are seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Narycian woods of pitch, whose gloomy shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seems for retreat of heavenly muses made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But much more pleasing are those fields to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That need not ploughs, nor human industry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en cold Caucasean rocks with trees are spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wear green forests on their hilly head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though bending from the blast of eastern storms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though shent their leaves, and shattered are their arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet heaven their various plants for use designs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For houses, cedars⁠—and, for shipping, pines⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cypress provides for spokes and wheels of wains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all for keels of ships, that scour the watery plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willows in twigs are fruitful, elms in leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war, from stubborn myrtle, shafts receives⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cornels, javelins; and the tougher yew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receives the bending figure of a bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor box, nor limes, without their use are made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smooth-grained, and proper for the turner’s trade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which curious hands may carve, and steel with ease invade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light alder stems the Po’s impetuous tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bees in hollow oaks their honey hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now balance, with these gifts, the fumy joys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wine, attended with eternal noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wine urged to lawless lust the Centaurs’ train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through wine they quarrelled, and through wine were slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh happy, if he knew his happy state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swain, who, free from business and debate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receives his easy food from nature’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just returns of cultivated land!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No palace, with a lofty gate, he wants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To admit the tides of early visitants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eager eyes devouring, as they pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breathing figures of Corinthian brass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No statues threaten, from high pedestals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Persian arras hides his homely walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With antic vests, which, through their shady fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betray the streaks of ill-dissembled gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He boasts no wool, whose native white is dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With purple poison of Assyrian pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No costly drugs of Araby defile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With foreign scents, the sweetness of his oil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But easy quiet, a secure retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A harmless life that knows not how to cheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With home-bred plenty, the rich owner bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rural pleasures crown his happiness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unvexed with quarrels, undisturbed with noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The country king his peaceful realm enjoys⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cool grots, and living lakes, the flowery pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of meads, and streams that through the valley glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shady groves that easy sleep invite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after toilsome days, a sweet repose at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild beasts of nature in his woods abound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And youth, of labour patient, plow the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inured to hardship, and to homely fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor venerable age is wanting there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In great examples to the youthful train;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor are the gods adored with rites profane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence Astraea took her flight; and here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prints of her departing steps appear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye sacred muses! with whose beauty fired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul is ravished, and my brain inspired⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose priest I am, whose holy fillets wear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would you your poet’s first petition hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me the ways of wandering stars to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The depths of heaven above, and earth below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach me the various labours of the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whence proceed the eclipses of the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why flowing tides prevail upon the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in what dark recess they shrink again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer nights, and shortens winter days.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if my heavy blood restrain the flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my free soul, aspiring to the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nature, and unclouded fields of light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My next desire is, void of care and strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A country cottage near a crystal flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A winding valley, and a lofty wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some god conduct me to the sacred shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Bacchanals are sung by Spartan maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lift me high to Haemus’ hilly crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in the plains of Tempè lay me down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lead me to some solitary place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cover my retreat from human race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Happy the man, who, studying nature’s laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through known effects can trace the secret cause⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mind possessing in a quiet state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearless of Fortune, and resigned to Fate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And happy too is he, who decks the bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sylvans, and adores the rural powers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mind, unmoved, the bribes of courts can see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glittering baits, and purple slavery⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hopes the people’s praise, nor fears their frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor, when contending kindred tear the crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will set up one, or pull another down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Without concern he hears, but hears from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of tumults, and descents, and distant war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with a superstitious fear is awed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what befalls at home, or what abroad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor his own peace disturbs with pity for the poor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor envies he the rich their happy store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feeds on fruits, which, of their own accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The willing ground and laden trees afford.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his loved home no lucre him can draw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The senate’s mad decrees he never saw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor heard, at bawling bars, corrupted law.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some to the seas, and some to camps, resort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some with impudence invade the court:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In foreign countries, others seek renown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wars and taxes, others waste their own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And houses burn, and houshold gods deface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drink in bowls which glittrring gems enchase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To loll on couches, rich with citron steds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay their guilty limbs in Tyrian beds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This wretch in earth entombs his golden ore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hovering and brooding on his buried store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some patriot fools to popular praise aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By public speeches, which worse fools admire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, from both benches, with redoubled sounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The applause of lords and commoners abounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some, through ambition, or through thirst of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have slain their brothers, or their country sold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaving their sweet homes, in exile run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lands that lye beneath another sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The peasant, innocent of all these ills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crooked ploughs the fertile fallows tills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the round year with daily labour fills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence the country markets are supplied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough remains for houshold charge beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wife and tender children to sustain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gratefully to feed his dumb deserving train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor cease his labours till the yellow field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A full return of bearded harvest yield⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crop so plenteous, as the land to load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ercome the crowded barns, and lodge on ricks abroad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus every several season is employed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some spent in toil, and some in ease enjoyed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yeaning ewes prevent the springing year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laden boughs their fruits in autumn bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis then the vine her liquid harvest yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baked in the sunshine of ascending fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winter comes; and then the falling mast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For greedy swine provides a full repast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then olives, ground in mills, their fatness boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And winter fruits are mellowed by the frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cares are eased with intervals of bliss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His little children, climbing for a kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome their father’s late return at night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His faithful bed is crowned with chaste delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His kine with swelling udders ready stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lowing for the pail, invite the milker’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wanton kids, with budding horns prepared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fight harmless battles in his homely yard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself, in rustic pomp, on holidays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rural powers a just oblation pays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the green his careless limbs displays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearth is in the midst; the herdsmen, round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cheerful fire, provoke his health in goblets crowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He calls on Bacchus, and propounds the prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The groom his fellow-groom at butts defies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bends his bow, and levels with his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, stript for wrestling, smears his limbs with oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watches, with a trip his foe to foil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was the life the frugal Sabines led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Remus and his brother-god were bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom the austere Etrurian virtue rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this rude life our homely fathers chose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Rome from such a race derived her birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(The seat of empire and the conquered earth),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now on seven high hills triumphant reigns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in that compass all the world contains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Saturn’s rebel son usurped the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When beasts were only slain for sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While peaceful Crete enjoyed her ancient lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere sounding hammers forged the inhuman sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere hollow drums were beat, before the breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brazen trumpets rung the peals of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The good old god his hunger did assuage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With roots and herbs, and gave the golden age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, over-laboured with so long a course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis time to set at ease the smoking horse.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
