<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The poet, in the beginning of this book, propounds the general design of each Georgic: and, after a solemn invocation of all the gods who are any way related to his subject, he addresses himself, in particular, to Augustus, whom he complements with divinity; and after strikes into his business. He shows the different kinds of tillage proper to different soils; traces out the original of agriculture; gives a catalogue of the husbandman’s tools; specifies the employments peculiar to each season; describes the changes of the weather, with the signs in heaven and earth that fore-bode them; instances many of the prodigies that happened near the time of Julius Caesar’s death; and shuts up all with a supplication to the gods for the safety of Augustus, and the preservation of Rome.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>What makes a plenteous harvest, when to turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruitful soil, and when to sow the corn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The care of sheep, of oxen, and of kine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how to raise on elms the teeming vine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The birth and genius of the frugal bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sing, Maecenas, and I sing to thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye deities! who fields and plains protect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who rule the seasons, and the year direct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bacchus and fostering Ceres, powers divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who gave us corn for mast, for water, wine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye Fawns, propitious to the rural swains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye Nymphs that haunt the mountains and the plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join in my work, and to my numbers bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your needful succour; for your gifts I sing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, whose trident struck the teeming earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a passage for the courser’s birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, for whom the Cean shore sustains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy milky herds that graze the flowery plains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, the shepherds’ tutelary god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave, for a while, O Pan! thy loved abode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if Arcadian fleeces be thy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fields and mountains to my song repair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inventor, Pallas, of the fattening oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou founder of the plough, and ploughman’s toil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, whose hands the shrowd-like cypress rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, all ye gods and goddesses, that wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rural honours, and increase the year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You, who supply the ground with seeds of grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you, who swell those seeds with kindly rain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chiefly thou, whose undetermined state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yet the business of the gods’ debate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether in after-times to be declared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patron of the world, and Rome’s peculiar guard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or o’er the fruits and seasons to preside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the round circuit of the year to guide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Powerful of blessings, which thou strew’st around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with thy goddess-mother’s myrtle crowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wilt thou, Caesar, choose the watery reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smooth the surges, and correct the main?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mariners, in storms, to thee shall pray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en utmost Thulè shall thy power obey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Neptune shall resign the fasces of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watery virgins for thy bed shall strive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tethys all her waves in dowry give.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wilt thou bless our summers with thy rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, seated near the Balance, poise the days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where in the void of heaven, a space is free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the Scorpion and the Maid, for thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Scorpion, ready to receive thy laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yields half his region, and contracts his claws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever part of heaven thou shalt obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For let not hell presume of such a reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let so dire a thirst of empire move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mind, to leave thy kindred gods above;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Greece admires Elysium’s blest retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Proserpine affects her silent seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, importuned by Ceres to remove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prefers the fields below to those above),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou propitious, Caesar! guide my course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to my bold endeavours add thy force:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pity the poet’s and the ploughman’s cares;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Interest thy greatness in our mean affairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And use thyself betimes to hear our prayers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While yet the spring is young, while earth unbinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her frozen bosom to the western winds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While mountain snows dissolve against the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And streams yet new, from precipices run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en in this early dawning of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Produce the plough, and yoke the sturdy steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And goad him till he groans beneath his toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the bright share is buried in the soil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crop rewards the greedy peasant’s pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which twice the sun, and twice the cold sustains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bursts the crowded barns with more than promised gains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ere we stir the yet unbroken ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The various course of seasons must be found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weather, and the setting of the winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The culture suiting to the several kinds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of seeds and plants, and what will thrive and rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the genius of the soil denies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ground with Bacchus, that with Ceres, suits:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That other loads the trees with happy fruits:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fourth, with grass, unbidden, decks the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Tmolus is with yellow saffron crowned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>India black ebon and white ivory bears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soft Idumè weeps her od’rous tears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Pontus sends her beaver-stones from far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And naked Spaniards temper steel for war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Epirus, for the Elean chariot, breeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(In hopes of palms) a race of running steeds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is the original contract; these the laws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imposed by Nature, and by Nature’s cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sundry places, when Deucalion hurled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mother’s entrails on the desert world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence men, a hard laborious kind, were born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then borrow part of winter for thy corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And early, with thy team, the glebe in furrows turn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, while the turf lies open, and unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succeeding suns may bake the mellow ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if the soil be barren, only scar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surface, and but lightly print the share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When cold Arcturus rises with the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest wicked weeds the corn should overrun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In watery soils; or lest the barren sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should suck the moisture from the thirsty land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both these unhappy soils the swain forbears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keeps a sabbath of alternate years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the spent earth may gather heart again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, bettered by cessation, bear the grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least where vetches, pulse, and tares, have stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stalks of lupines grew (a stubborn wood),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ensuing season, in return, may bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bearded product of the golden year:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For flax and oats will burn the tender field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleepy poppies harmful harvests yield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sweet vicissitudes of rest and toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make easy labour, and renew the soil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet sprinkle sordid ashes all around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And load with fattening dung thy fallow ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus change of seeds for meagre soils is best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth manured, not idle, though at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long practice has a sure improvement found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kindled fires to burn the barren ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the light stubble, to the flames resigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is driven along, and crackles in the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether from hence the hollow womb of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is warmed with secret strength for better birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, when the latent vice is cured by fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Redundant humours through the pores expire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that the warmth distends the chinks, and makes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New breathings, whence new nourishment she takes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that the heat the gaping ground constrains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New knits the surface, and new strings the veins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest soaking showers should pierce her secret seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or freezing Boreas chill her genial heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or scorching suns too violently beat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor is the profit small the peasant makes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who smooths with harrows, or who pounds with rakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crumbling clods; nor Ceres from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regards his labours with a grudging eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor his, who ploughs across the furrowed grounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the back of earth inflicts new wounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he, with frequent exercise, commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unwilling soil, and tames the stubborn lands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye swains, invoke the powers who rule the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a moist summer, and a winter dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For winter drought rewards the peasant’s pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broods indulgent on the buried grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence Mysia boasts her harvests, and the tops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gargarus admire their happy crops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first the soil receives the fruitful seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make no delay, but cover it with speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fenced from cold, the pliant furrows break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the surly clod resists the rake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And call the floods from high, to rush amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pregnant streams, to swell the teeming grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when the fiery suns too fiercely play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrivelled herbs on withering stems decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wary ploughman, on the mountain’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undams his watery stores⁠—huge torrents flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rattling down the rocks, large moisture yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempering the thirsty fever of the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, lest the stem, too feeble for the freight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should scarce sustain the head’s unwieldy weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sends in his feeding flocks betimes, to invade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rising bulk of the luxuriant blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet the aspiring offspring of the grain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ertops the ridges of the furrowed plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drains the standing waters, when they yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too large a beverage to the drunken field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But most in autumn, and the showery spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When dubious months uncertain weather bring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When fountains open, when impetuous rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swells hasty brooks, and pours upon the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When earth with slime and mud is covered o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hollow places spew their watery store.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor yet the ploughman, nor the labouring steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sustain alone the hazards of the year:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But glutton geese, and the Strymonian crane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With foreign troops, invade the tender grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And towering weeds malignant shadows yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spreading succory chokes the rising field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sire of gods and men, with hard decrees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbids our plenty to be bought with ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wills that mortal men, inured to toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should exercise with pains, the grudging soil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself invented first the shining share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whetted human industry by care;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself did handicrafts and arts ordain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor suffered sloth to rust his active reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere this, no peasant vexed the peaceful ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which only turfs and greens for altars, found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fences parted fields, nor marks nor bounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinguished acres of litigious grounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all was common, and the fruitful earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was free to give her unexacted birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove added venom to the viper’s brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swelled, with raging storms, the peaceful flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commissioned hungry wolves to infest the fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook from oaken leaves the liquid gold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Removed from humane reach the cheerful fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the rivers bade the wine retire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That studious need might useful arts explore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From furrowed fields to reap the foodful store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And force the veins of clashing flints to expire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lurking seeds of their celestial fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then first on seas the hollowed alder swam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sailors quartered heaven, and found a name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every fixed and every wandering star⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northern Car.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then toils for beasts, and lime for birds, were found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deep-mouthed dogs did forest walks surround;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And casting-nets were spread in shallow brooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drags in the deep, and baits were hung on hooks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then saws were toothed, and sounding axes made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For wedges first did yielding wood invade);</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And various arts in order did succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(What cannot endless labour, urged by need?)</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First Ceres taught, the ground with grain to sow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And armed with iron shares the crooked plough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now Dodonian oaks no more supplied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mast, and trees their forest-fruit denied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon was his labour doubled to the swain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blasting mildews blackened all his grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tough thistles choked the fields, and killed the corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an unthrifty crop of weeds was born:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then burs and brambles, an unbidden crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of graceless guests, the unhappy field subdue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oats unblest, and darnel domineers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shoots its head above the shining ears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that, unless the land with daily care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is exercised, and, with an iron war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rakes and harrows, the proud foes expelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And birds with clamours frighted from the field⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the boughs are lopped that shade the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heaven invoked with vows for fruitful rain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On others’ crops you may with envy look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shake for food the long-abandoned oak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor must we pass untold what arms they wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who labour tillage and the furrowed field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without whose aid the ground her corn denies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing can be sown, and nothing rise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crooked plough, the share, the towering height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wagons, and the cart’s unwieldy weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sled, the tumbril, hurdles, and the flail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fan of Bacchus, with the flying sail⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These all must be prepared, if ploughmen hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The promised blessing of a bounteous crop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young elms, with early force, in copses bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit for the figure of the crooked plough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of eight foot long a fastened beam prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side the head, produce an ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sink a socket for the shining share.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beech the plough-tail, and the bending yoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or softer linden hardened in the smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could be long in precepts, but I fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So mean a subject might offend your ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Delve of convenient depth your thrashing-floor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tempered clay then fill and face it o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the weighty roller run the round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smooth the surface of the unequal ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, cracked with summer heats, the flooring flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sinks, and through the crannies weeds arise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sundry foes the rural realm surround:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field-mouse builds her garner under ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gathered grain: the blind laborious mole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In winding mazes works her hidden hole:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hollow caverns vermin make abode⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hissing serpent, and the swelling toad:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The corn-devouring weasel here abides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wise ant her wintry store provides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mark well the flowering almonds in the wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If odorous blooms the bearing branches load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glebe will answer to the sylvan reign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great heats will follow, and large crops of grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if a wood of leaves o’ershade the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such and so barren will thy harvest be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain the hind shall vex the thrashing-floor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For empty chaff and straw will be thy store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some steep their seed, and some in cauldrons boil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vigorous nitre and with lees of oil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er gentle fires, the exuberant juice to drain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swell the flattering husks with fruitful grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet is not the success for years assured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though chosen is the seed, and fully cured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the peasant, with his annual pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renews his choice, and culls the largest grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus all below, whether by Nature’s curse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Fate’s decree, degenerate still to worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the boat’s brawny crew the current stem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, slow advancing, struggle with the stream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if they slack their hands, or cease to strive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then down the flood with headlong haste they drive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor must the ploughman less observe the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Kids, Dragon, and Arcturus, rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than sailors homeward bent, who cut their way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Helle’s stormy straits, and oyster-breeding sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when Astaea’s Balance hung on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the nights and days divides the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then yoke your oxen, sow your winter-grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till cold December comes with driving rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linseed and fruitful poppy bury warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a dry season, and prevent the storm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sow beans and clover in a rotten soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And millet rising from your annual toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with his golden horns, in full career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bull beats down the barriers of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Argo and the Dog forsake the northern sphere.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, if your care to wheat alone extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Maia with her sisters first descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bright Gnossian diadem downward bend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before you trust in earth your future hope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else expect a listless lazy crop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some swains have sown before; but most have found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A husky harvest from the grudging ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vile vetches would you sow, or lentils lean?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The growth of Egypt, or the kidney-bean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begin when the slow Wagoner descends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor cease your sowing till mid-winter ends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, through twelve bright signs Apollo guides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The year, and earth in several climes divides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five girdles bind the skies: the torrid zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glows with the passing and repassing sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on the right and left, the extremes of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To frosts and snows and bitter blasts are given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt the midst and these, the gods assigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two habitable seats for human kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, ’cross their limits, cut a sloping way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the twelve signs in beauteous order sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two poles turn round the globe; one seen to rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Scythian hills, and one in Libyan skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The first sublime in heaven, the last is whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Below the regions of the nether world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Around our pole the spiry Dragon glides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a winding stream, the Bears divides⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The less and greater, who by Fates decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abhor to dive beneath the northern sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, as they say, perpetual night is found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silence brooding on the unhappy ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, when Aurora leaves our northern sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lights the downward heaven, and rises there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when on us she breathes the living light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red Vesper kindles there the tapers of the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence uncertain seasons we may know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when to reap the grain, and when to sow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when to fell the furzes; when ’tis meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spread the flying canvas for the fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Observe what stars arise or disappear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the four quarters of the rolling year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when cold weather and continued rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labouring husband in his house restrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him forecast his work with timely care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which else is huddled, when the skies are fair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let him mark the sheep, or whet the shining share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hollow trees for boats, or number o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sacks, or measure his increasing store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sharpen stakes, or head the forks, or twine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sallow twigs to tie the straggling vine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wicker baskets weave, or air the corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grinded grain betwixt two marbles turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No laws, divine or human, can restrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From necessary works the labouring swain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en holidays and feasts permission yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To float the meadows, or to fence the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fire the brambles, snare the birds, and steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wholesome water-falls the woolly sheep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft the drudging ass is driven with toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To neighbouring towns with apples and with oil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning, late and laden, home with gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bartered pitch, and hand-mills for the grain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lucky days, in each revolving moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For labour choose; the fifth be sure to shun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gave the Furies and pale Pluto birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And armed, against the skies, the sons of earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mountains piled on mountains, thrice they strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scale the steepy battlements of Jove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice his lightning and red thunder played,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their demolished works in ruin laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seventh is, next the tenth, the best to join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young oxen to the yoke, and plant the vine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, weavers, stretch your stays upon the weft:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ninth is good for travel, bad for theft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some works in dead of night are better done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the morning dew prevents the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parched meads and stubble, mow by Phoebe’s light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which both require the coolness of the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For moisture then abounds, and pearly rains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descend in silence to refresh the plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wife and husband equally conspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work by night, and rake the winter fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sharpens torches in the glimmering room;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shoots the flying shuttle through the loom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or boils in kettles must of wine, and skims,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With leaves, the dregs that overflow the brims:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And till the watchful cock awakes the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sings, to drive the tedious hours away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, in warm weather, when the skies are clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By daylight reap the product of the year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the sun your golden grain display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrash it out, and winnow it by day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plough naked, swain, and naked sow the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lazy winter numbs the labouring hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In genial winter, swains enjoy their store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget their hardships and recruit for more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The farmer to full bowls invites his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, what he got with pains, with pleasure spends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sailors, when escaped from stormy seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First crown their vessels, then indulge their ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet that’s the proper time to thrash the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mast of oak, your fathers’ homely food;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather laurel-berries, and the spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bloody myrtles, and to press your oil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For stalking cranes to set the guileful snare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To enclose the stags in toils, and hunt the hare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Balearic slings, or Gnossian bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To persecute from far the flying doe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when the fleecy skies new-clothe the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cakes of rustling ice come rolling down the flood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now sing we stormy stars, when autumn weighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The year, and adds to nights, and shortens days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suns declining shine with feeble rays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What cares must then attend the toiling swain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when the lowering spring, with lavish rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beats down the slender stem and bearded grain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet the head is green, or lightly swelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With milky moisture, overlooks the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en when the farmer, now secure of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sends in the swains to spoil the finished year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en while the reaper fills his greedy hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And binds the golden sheaves in brittle bands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft have I seen a sudden storm arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all the warring winds that sweep the skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavy harvest from the root is torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whirled aloft the lighter stubble borne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a force the flying rack is driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such a winter wears the face of heaven:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft whole sheets descend of sluicy rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sucked by the spongy clouds from off the main:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lofty skies at once come pouring down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The promised crop and golden labours drown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dikes are filled; and, with a roaring sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rising rivers float the nether ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rocks the bellowing voice of boiling seas rebound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father of the gods his glory shrouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Involved in tempests, and a night of clouds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the middle darkness flashing out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fits he deals his fiery bolts about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth feels the motions of her angry god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her entrails tremble, and her mountains nod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flying beasts in forests seek abode:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep horror seizes every human breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pride is humbled and their fear confessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he from high his rolling thunder throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fires the mountains with repeated blows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocks are from their old foundation rent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds redouble, and the rains augment:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves on heaps are dashed against the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the woods, and now the billows roar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In fear of this, observe the starry signs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Saturn houses, and where Hermes joins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first to heaven thy due devotions pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And annual gifts on Ceres’ altars lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When winter’s rage abates, when cheerful hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake the spring, and spring awakes the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the green turf thy careless limbs display,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And celebrate the mighty Mother’s day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then the hills with pleasing shades are crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleeps are sweeter on the silken ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With milder beams the sun securely shines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fat are the lambs, and luscious are the wines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let every swain adore her power divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And milk and honey mix with sparkling wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let all the choir of clowns attend the show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In long procession, shouting as they go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invoking her to bless their yearly stores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inviting plenty to their crowded floors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus in the spring, and thus in summer’s heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the sickles touch the ripening wheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Ceres call; and let the labouring hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With oaken wreaths his hollow temples bind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Ceres let him call, and Ceres praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With uncouth dances, and with country lays.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And that by certain signs we may presage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heats and rains, and winds’ impetuous rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sovereign of the heavens has set on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon to mark the changes of the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When southern blasts should cease, and when the swain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should near their folds his feeding flocks restrain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, e’er the rising winds begin to roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The working seas advance to wash the shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft whispers run along the leafy woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mountains whistle to the murmuring floods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en then the doubtful billows scarce abstain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tossed vessel on the troubled main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When crying cormorants forsake the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, stretching to the covert, wing their way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sportful coots run skimming o’er the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When watchful herons leave their watery stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, mounting upward with erected flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gain on the skies, and soar above the sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft before tempestuous winds arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeming stars fall headlong from the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shooting through the darkness, guild the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sweeping glories, and long trails of light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chaff with eddy winds is whirled around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dancing leaves are lifted from the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And floating feathers on the waters play.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when the wingèd thunder takes his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cold north, and east and west engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at their frontiers meet with equal rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds are crushed; a glut of gathered rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hollow ditches fills, and floats the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sailors furl their dropping sheets amain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wet weather seldom hurts the most unwise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So plain the signs, such prophets are the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wary crane foresees it first, and sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the storm, and leaves the lowly vales;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cow looks up, and from afar can find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The change of heaven, and snuffs it in the wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swallow skims the river’s watery face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frogs renew the croaks of their loquacious race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The careful ant her secret cell forsakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drags her eggs along the narrow tracks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At either horn the rainbow drinks the flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge flocks of rising rooks forsake their food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, crying, seek the shelter of the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides, the several sorts of watery fowls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That swim the seas, or haunt the standing pools,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swans that sail along the silver flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dive with stretching necks to search their food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then lave their backs with sprinkling dews in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stem the stream to meet the promised rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crow with clamorous cries the shower demands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And single stalks along the desert sands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nightly virgin, while her wheel she plies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foresees the storm impending in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sparkling lamps their sputtering light advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the sockets oily bubbles dance.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, after showers, ’tis easy to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning suns, and a serener sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars shine smarter; and the moon adorns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with unborrowed beams, her sharpened horns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The filmy gossamer now flits no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Halcyons bask on the short sunny shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their litter is not tossed by sows unclean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a blue droughty mist descends upon the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And owls, that mark the setting sun, declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A star-light evening, and a morning fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towering aloft, avenging Nisus flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, dared, below the guilty Scylla lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever frighted Scylla flies away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift Nisus follows and pursues his prey:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where injured Nisus takes his airy course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence trembling Scylla flies, and shuns his force:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This punishment pursues the unhappy maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the purple hair is dearly paid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, thrice the ravens rend the liquid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And croaking notes proclaim the settled fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, round their airy palaces they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To greet the sun; and seized with secret joy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When storms are overblown, with food repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their forsaken nests and callow care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that I think their breasts with heavenly souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspired, as man, who destiny controls:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, with the changeful temper of the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rams condense, and sunshine rarefies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So turn the species in their altered minds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Composed by calms, and discomposed by winds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence proceeds the birds’ harmonious voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hence the cows exult, and frisking lambs rejoice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Observe the daily circle of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the short year of each revolving moon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By them thou shalt foresee the following day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall a starry night thy hopes betray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first the moon appears, if then she shrouds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her silver crescent tipped with sable clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conclude she bodes a tempest on the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brews for fields impetuous floods of rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if her face with fiery flushing glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expect the rattling winds aloft to blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, four nights old (for that’s the surest sign),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sharpened horns if glorious then she shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next day, nor only that, but all the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her revolving race be wholly run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are void of tempests, both by land and sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sailors in the port their promised vow shall pay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Above the rest, the sun, who never lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foretells the change of weather in the skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, if he rise unwilling to his race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clouds on his brows, and spots upon his face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if through mists he shoots his sullen beams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frugal of light, in loose and straggling streams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suspect a drizzling day, with southern rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fatal to fruits, and flocks, and promised grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if Aurora, with half-opened eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a pale sickly cheek, salute the skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall the vine, with tender leaves, defend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her teeming clusters, when the storms descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When ridgy roofs and tiles can scarce avail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bar the ruin of the rattling hail?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, more than all, the setting sun survey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When down the steep of heaven he drives the day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For oft we find him finishing his race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With various colours erring on his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If fiery red his glowing globe descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High winds and furious tempests he portends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if his cheeks are swoln with livid blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bodes wet weather by his watery hue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If dusky spots are varied on his brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, streaked with red, a troubled colour show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sullen mixture shall at once declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winds, rain, and storms, and elemental war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What desperate madman then would venture o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frith, or haul his cables from the shore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if with purple rays he brings the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a pure heaven resigns to quiet night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rising winds, or falling storms are nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But northern breezes through the forest fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive the rack, and purge the ruffled sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The unerring sun by certain signs declares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the late e’en, or early morn prepares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the south projects a stormy day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when the clearing north will puff the clouds away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sun reveals the secrets of the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who dares give the source of light the lie?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The change of empires often he declares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce tumults, hidden treasons, open wars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He first the fate of Caesar did foretell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pitied Rome, when Rome in Caesar fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In iron clouds concealed the public light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And impious mortals feared eternal night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor was the fact foretold by him alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature her self stood forth, and seconded the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth, air, and seas, with prodigies were signed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And birds obscene, and howling dogs, divined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What rocks did Aetna’s bellowing mouth expire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her torn entrails! and what floods of fire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What clanks were heard, in German skies afar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of arms, and armies, rushing to the war!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dire earthquakes rent the solid Alps below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from their summits shook the eternal snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale spectres in the close of night were seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And voices heard, of more than mortal men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silent groves: dumb sheep and oxen spoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And streams ran backward, and their beds forsook;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yawning earth disclosed the abyss of hell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weeping statues did the wars foretell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holy sweat from brazen idols fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, rising in his might, the king of floods</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed through the forests, tore the lofty woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rolling onward, with a sweepy sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore houses, herds, and labouring hinds away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood sprang from wells; wolves howled in towns by night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boding victims did the priests affright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such peals of thunder never poured from high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor forky lightnings flashed from such a sullen sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red meteors ran across the ethereal space;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stars disappeared, and comets took their place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, the Emathian plains once more were strewed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Roman bodies, and just heaven thought good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fatten twice those fields with Roman blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, after length of time, the labouring swains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who turn the turfs of those unhappy plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall rusty piles from the ploughed furrows take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over empty helmets pass the rake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amazed at antique titles on the stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty relics of gigantic bones.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye home-born deities, of mortal birth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou father Romulus, and mother Earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goddess unmoved! whose guardian arms extend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er Tuscan Tiber’s course, and Roman towers defend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With youthful Caesar your joint powers engage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor hinder him to save the sinking age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! let the blood, already spilt, atone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the past crimes of cursed Laomedon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven wants thee there; and long the gods, we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have grudged thee, Caesar, to the world below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fraud and rapine right and wrong confound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where impious arms from every part resound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And monstrous crimes in every shape are crowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peaceful peasant to the wars is pressed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields lie fallow in inglorious rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain no pasture to the flock affords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crooked scythes are straightened into swords:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Euphrates her soft offspring arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here the Rhine rebellows with alarms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The neighb’ring cities range on sev’ral sides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perfidious Mars long-plighted leagues divides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er the wasted world in triumph rides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So four fierce coursers, starting to the race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scour through the plain, and lengthen every pace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor reins, nor curbs, nor threatening cries, they fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But force along the trembling charioteer.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
